.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH LIQUIDSOAP 1 "Oct 08, 2011" "Liquidsoap 1.0.0"


.SH NAME
liquidsoap \- a multimedia streaming language
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B liquidsoap
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ script | expression ]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Liquidsoap
is a programming language for describing multimedia streaming systems.
It is very flexible, making simple things simple but giving a lot
of control for advanced uses.
.B Liquidsoap
supports audio, video and MIDI streams,
and a wide range of input/output operators
including Icecast and various soundcard APIs.
It can perform a broad range of signal processing,
combine streams in various ways, support custom transitions,
generate sound procedurally...
and all this can be assembled as you wish.
Input files can be accessed remotely, or even be synthesized on the fly
using external scripts such as speech synthesis.
Finally, interaction with a running liquidsoap instance is possible
via telnet or socket.

Liquidsoap scripts passed on the command line will be evaluated:
they shall be used to define the streaming system to be ran.
It is possible to pass multiple scripts; they will all be ran successively,
and definitions from one script can be used in subsequent ones.
A script will be read from standard input if
.B \-
is given as script filename.
Information about scripting liquidsoap is available on our website:
.B http://savonet.sf.net/

If the parameter is not a file it will be treated as an expression which will 
be executed. It is a convenient way to test simple one-line scripts. When 
running only one-liners, the default is to log messages directly on stdout 
rather than to a file.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \- 
 Read script from standard input.
.TP
.BR \-\- 
Stop parsing the command-line and pass subsequent items to the
script.
.TP
.BR \-\-debug 
Print debugging log messages.
.TP
.BR \-\-dynamic\-plugins\-dir " " \fIpath\fR 
Directory where to look for plugins.
.TP
.BR \-\-errors\-as\-warnings 
Issue warnings instead of fatal errors for unused variables and
ignored expressions. If you are not sure about it, it is better to not use it.
.TP
.BR \-\-interactive 
Start an interactive interpreter.
.TP
.BR \-\-list\-plugins 
List all plugins (builtin scripting values, supported formats and
protocols).
.TP
.BR \-\-list\-plugins\-xml 
List all plugins (builtin scripting values, supported formats and
protocols), output as XML.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-pervasives 
Do not load pervasive script libraries.
.TP
.BR \-\-version 
Display liquidsoap's version.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-check 
Check and evaluate scripts but do not perform any streaming.
.TP
.BR \-cl ", " \-\-check\-lib 
Like \-\-check but treats all scripts and expressions as libraries, so
that unused toplevel variables are not reported.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-daemon 
Run in daemon mode.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force\-start 
For advanced dynamic uses: force liquidsoap to start even when no
active source is initially defined.
.TP
.BR \-h " " \fIplugin\fR
Print the description of a plugin, eg. a builtin scripting function.
.TP
.BR \-i 
Display infered types.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-parse\-only 
Parse scripts but do not type-check and run them.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet 
Do not print log messages on standard output.
.TP
.BR \-r " " \fIfilename\fR
Process a request.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-disable\-telnet 
Disable the telnet server.
.TP
.BR \-U ", " \-\-disable\-unix\-socket 
Disable the unix socket.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-enable\-telnet 
Enable the telnet server.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-enable\-unix\-socket 
Enable the unix socket.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose 
Print log messages on standard output.
.TP
.BR \-\-conf\-descr\-key " " \fIkey\fR
Describe a configuration key.
.TP
.BR \-\-conf\-descr 
Show all configuration keys with their documentation.
.TP
.BR \-\-conf\-descr\-liqi 
Show all configuration keys with their documentation in liqi (documentation 
wiki) format.
.TP
.BR \-\-conf\-dump 
Dump the configuration state
.TP
.BR \-help ", " \-\-help
Display this list of options
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
Our website
.B http://savonet.sf.net/
and the HTML documentation coming with your distribution of liquidsoap.
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Savonet team <savonet-users@lists.sourceforge.net>
